#summary The Twingle data API.

You are here: [http://code.google.com/p/twingle/ Twingle] - [Overview] - Data API

== Data API ==

The data API is the main way to access Your Data. In includes two major components: adding data (injection) and retrieving data (querying).

== Ontology Classes ==

The Twingle data API contains classes that represent entities in its [Ontology] which are built from [Database] primitives.

{{{
class Person extends DatabaseObject {
  /** This person's primary name, or Nil if they have none. */
  def name () :String = attr(Text, "name").firstOption.getOrElse(Nil)

  /** Other names by which this person is known. */
  def aliases () :Text = attr(Text, "aliases")

  /** Email addresses associated with this person. */
  def addresses () :Text = attr(Text, "addresses")
}

class Document extends DatabaseObject {
  /** A URL defining this document's location or Nil. */
  def location () :String = attr(Text, "location").firstOption.getOrElse(Nil)

  /** The name of this document or Nil. */
  def name () :String = attr(Text, "name").firstOption.getOrElse(Nil)

  /** The text of this document or Nil. */
  def text () :String = attr(Text, "text").firstOption.getOrElse(Nil)

  /** This document's binary data or Nil. */
  def bits () :ByteArray = attr(Bits, "bits").firstOption.getOrElse(Nil)

  /** The date on which this document was created or Nil. */
  def created () :Date = attr(Date, "created").firstOption.getOrElse(Nil)

  /** The date on which this document was last modified or Nil. */
  def lastModified () :Date = attr(Date, "last_modified").firstOption.getOrElse(Nil)
}

class Message extends Document {
  // TBD
}

class Conversation extends DatabaseObject {
  // TBD
}
}}}

== Injection API ==

The injection API relies on the caller to have done the work of parsing the source data into objects from Twingle's ObjectModel. However, nothing ...

TBD

== Query API ==

TBD